CONTENTS
CONTENTS




 Learning Objectives
                      + 0 ) 2 6 - 4



                                 OPTO-
                                                    #!
 ➣ Fundamentals of Light
 ➣ Light Emitting Diode (LED)
 ➣ Use of LEDs in Facsimile      ELECTRONIC
   Machines
 ➣ Liquid Crystal Displays
 ➣ P-N Junction Photodiode
                                 DEVICES
 ➣ Dust Sensor
 ➣ Photoconductive Cell
 ➣ Phototransistor
 ➣ Photodarlington
 ➣ Photo voltaic or Solar Cell
 ➣ Laser Diode
 ➣ Optical Disks
 ➣ Read-only Optical Disk
   Equipment
 ➣ Printers Using Laser Diodes
 ➣ Hologram Scanners
 ➣ Laser Range Finder
 ➣ Light-activated SCR(LASCR)
 ➣ Optical Isolators
 ➣ Optical Modulators
 ➣ Optical Fibre
   Communication Systems         Ç Researchers have demonstrated a new type
                                    of nanometer scale optoelectronic device
 ➣ Optical Fibre Data Links          that performs addition and other complex
                                                 logic operations




   CONTENTS
   CONTENTS
2088       Electrical Technology

53.1. Fundamentals of Light
      According to the Quantum Theory, light consists of discrete packets of energy called photons.
The energy contained in a photon depends on the frequency of the light and is given by the relation
E = hf where h is Plank’s constant (6.625 × 10−34 Joule-second). In this equation, energy E is in
Joules and frequency f is in hertz (Hz). As seen, photon energy is directly proportional to frequency:
higher the frequency, greater the energy. Now, velocity of light is given by c = fλ where c is the
velocity of the light (3 × 10 m/s) and λ is the wavelength of light in metres. The wavelength of light
                              8

determines its colour in the visible range and whether it is ultraviolet or infrared outside the visible
range.
      Now,                 E = hf = hc/λ or λ = hc/E metres
                                              −34                             −26
      ∴                    λ = (6.625 × 10 ) × (3 × 10 )/E = (19.875 × 10 )/E
                                                           8
                                                                                          —E in Joules
                                                               −19
      If E is in electron-volt (eV), then since 1 eV = 1.6 × 10 J
                                               −26              −19               −7
      ∴                    λ = (19.875 × 10 )/(E × 1.6 × 10 ) = (12.42 × 10 )/E metre
      or                   λ = 1.242 µm
      In a forward-biased P-N junction, electrons and holes both cross the junction. In the process,
some electrons and holes recombine with the result that electrons lose energy. The amount of energy
lost is equal to the difference in energy between the conduction and valence bands, this being known
as the semiconductor energy band gap Eg. The value of Eg for silicon is 1.1 eV, for GaAs is 1.43 eV
and for InAs is 0.36 eV. For example, the wavelength of light emitted by silicon P-N junction is
λ = 1.242/Eg = 1.242/1.1 = 1.13 µm.

53.2. Light Emitting Diode (LED)
     (a) Theory
     As the name indicates, it is
a forward-biased P-N junction
which emits visible light when
energised. As discussed earlier
(Art. 53.40), charge carrier re-
combination takes place when
electrons from the N-side cross                              Fig. 53.1
the junction and recombine with the holes on the P-side.
     Now, electrons are in the higher conduction band on the N-side whereas holes are in the lower
                                             valence band on the P-side. During recombination, some
                                             of the energy difference is given up in the form of heat
                Light Emission
                                             and light (i.e. photons). For Si and Ge junctions, greater
                                             percentage of this energy is given up in the form of heat
                                    l        so that the amount emitted as light is insignificant. But
                                             in the case of other semiconductor materials like gal-
                                             lium arsenide (GaAs), gallium phosphide (GaP) and gal-
                                             lium-arsenide-phosphide (GaAsP), a greater percent-
                                             age of energy released during recombination is given
                                    R        out in the form of light. If the semiconductor material
                                             is translucent, light is emitted and the junction becomes
              Light emitting diode
                                             a light source i.e. a light-emitting diode (LED) as shown
schematically in Fig. 53.1. The colour of the emitted light depends on the type of material used as
given on the next page.
                                                                        Optoelectronic Devices    2089
     1. GaAs          —       infrared radiation (invisible).
     2. GaP           —       red or green light.             a
     3. GaAsP —               red or yellow (amber) light.      k
     LEDs that emit blue light are also available but red is
the most common. LEDs emit no light when reverse-bi-
ased. In fact, operating LEDs in reverse direction will                         Flat
quickly destroy them. Fig. 53.1 shows a picture of LEDs that emits different colours of light.
     (b) Construction
     Broadly speaking, the LED structures can be divided into two categories :
     1. Surface-emitting LEDs : These LEDs emit light in a direction perpendicular to the PN
          junction plane.
     2. Edge-emitting LEDs : These LEDs emit light
          in a direction parallel to the PN junction plane.
     Fig. 53.2 shows the construction of a surface-emit-
ting LED. As seen from this figure, an N-type layer is
grown on a substrate and a P-type layer is deposited on
it by diffusion. Since carrier recombination takes place
in the P-layer, it is kept upper most. The metal anode
connections are made at the outer edges of the P-layer
so as to allow more central surface area for the light to
escape. LEDs are manufactured with domed lenses in                        Fig. 53.2
order to lessen the reabsorption problem.
     A metal (gold) film is applied to the bottom of the substrate for reflecting as much light as
possible to the surface of the device and also to provide cathode connection. LEDs are always
encased in order to protect their delicate wires.
     Being made of semiconductor material, it is rugged and has a life of more than 10,000 hours.
     (c) Working
     The forward voltage across an LED is considerably greater than for a silicon PN junction diode.
Typically the maximum forward voltage for LED is between 1.2 V and 3.2 V depending on the
device. Reverse breakdown voltage for an LED is of the order of 3 V to 10 V. Fig. 53.3 (a) shows a
simple circuit to illustrate the working of an LED. The LED emits light in response to a sufficient
forward current. The amount of power output translated into light is directly proportional to the
forward current as shown in Fig. 53.3 (b). It is evident from this figure that greater the forward
current, the greater the light output.


                                                                        3
                                                         power (mW)
                                                         Light output




                                                                        2


                   R             IF                                     1

                                                                              50     100    150
                                                                              Forward Current
                                                                                   (mA)
                                Vbias

                                 (a)                                                 (b)
                                             Fig. 53.3
2090          Electrical Technology

     (d) Applications
     To chose emitting diodes for a particular application, one or more of the following points have to
be considered : wavelength of light emitted, input power required, output power, efficiency, turn-on
and turn-off time, mounting arrangement, light intensity and brightness etc.
     Since LEDs operate at voltage levels from 1.5 V to 3.3 V, they are highly compatible with solid-
state circuitry.
     Their uses include the following :
     1. LEDs are used in burglar-alarm systems;
     2. for solid-state video displays which are rapidly replacing cathode-ray tubes (CRT);
     3. in image sensing circuits used for ‘picturephone’;
     4. in the field of optical fibre communication systems where high-radiance GaAs diodes are
          matched into the silica-fibre optical cable;
     5. in data links and remote controllers;
     6. in arrays of different types for displaying alphanumeric (letters and numbers) or supplying
          input power to lasers or for entering information into optical computer memories;
     7. for numeric displays in hand-held or pocket calculators.
     As shown in Fig. 53.4 (a) a seven-segment display consists of seven rectangular LEDs which
can form the digits 0 to 9. The seven LED segments are labelled ‘a’ to ‘g’. Each of this segments is

                                            a

                                            b
                a
                                            c
          f            b
                g                           d

                                            e
         e             c

                                            f
                d

                                            g
               (a)
                                                                                        (c)
                                                        (b)

                                                 Fig. 53.4
                                           controlled through one of the display LEDs. Seven-seg-
                                           ment displays come in two types, common-cathode and
                                           common-anode type. In the common-cathode type, all the
                                           cathodes of the diodes are tied together as shown in Fig.
                                           53.4 (b). This makes it possible to light any segment by
                                           forward-biasing that particular LED. For example, to light
                                           number 5, segments a, f, g, c and d must be forward-bi-
                                           ased. Since the cathodes are tied to ground, only 5 volt is
                                           to be applied to the anode of these segments to light them.
                                                The common-anode seven-segment display has all its
                                           anodes tied together to +5 volt and ground is used to light
                                           the individual segments. Fig. 53.4(c) shows a picture of a
                 LED                       seven-segment display.
                                                                    Optoelectronic Devices                       2091
(e) Multicoloured LEDs
     LEDs are available which gives out light in either two or three colours. There are also blinking
LEDs. A two-colour LED is a three-terminal device as shown in Fig. 3.5. The longest lead is the
cathode and the remaining two leads are the anodes.
When leads R and C are forward-biased, the LED emits
red light and when leads G and C are forward-biased,
LED emits green light. The tricolour LED looks simi-
lar to the ordinary LED but emits, red, green or yellow
light depending on operating conditions. It has two leads
and each of these acts as both anode and cathode. When
dc current flows through it in one direction, LED emits      Fig. 53.5
red light but when current flows in the opposite direction, LED emits
green light. However, with ac current, yellow light is given out.
     The blinking LED is a combination of an oscillator and a LED in
one package. Since it has an anode and a cathode lead, it looks like an
ordinary LED. The blinking frequency is usually 3 Hz when the diode
forward bias is 5 V. It conducts about 20 mA of current when ON and
0.9 mA when OFF.
                                                                                                a1          a2
53.3. Use of LEDs in Facsimile Machines
     Fig. 53.6 shows a simplified schematic diagram of a facsimile (or                     k
fax) machine. As seen, the light from the LED array is focussed on the
document paper. The light reflected at the paper is focussed on a charge-coupled device (CCD) by a
combination of mirror and a lens. This causes the optical information to be converted into electrical
information. The electrical information is then sent through the data-processing unit to its destination
via telephone line.
                                                                                     er
                                                                                  pap
                                                                            ent
                                 Sensors for detecting                  cum
                                   document paper                    Do




                                                         Lens        CCD                        Telephone
                                        LED array
                                                                              Data-processing   line
                                                                                    unit

                            Mirror

                                                                Printing unit



                                                  Fig. 53.6
53.4. Liquid Crystals Displays
    (a) General
    A liquid crystal is a material (usually, an organic compound) which flows like a liquid at room
temperature but whose molecular structure has some properties normally associated with solids
(examples of such compounds are : cholesteryl nonanoate and p-azoxyanisole). As is well-known,
2092       Electrical Technology

the molecules in ordinary liquids
have random orientation but in a               Glass     Electrode
liquid crystal they are oriented in
a definite crystal pattern. Nor-
mally, a thin layer of liquid crys-
tal is transparent to incident light
but when an electric field is ap-
plied across it, its molecular ar-
rangement is disturbed causing               Spacer & Sealer       Liquid Crystal
changes in its optical properties.
When light falls on an activated                                                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
                                                        (a)                                (b)
layer of a liquid crystal, it is ei-
ther absorbed or else is scattered
by the disoriented molecules.
      (b) Construction
                                                                      (c)
      As shown in Fig. 53.7 (a), a
                                                                     Fig. 53.7
liquid crystal ‘cell’ consists of a
thin layer (about 10 µm) of a liquid crystal sandwiched between two glass sheets with transparent
electrodes deposited on their inside faces. With both glass sheets transparent, the cell is known as
transmittive type cell.             When one glass is transparent and the other has a
reflective coating, the cell is called reflective type. The LCD does not produce any illumination of its
own. It, in fact, depends entirely on illumination falling on it from an external source for its visual
effect.
      (c) Working
      The two types of display available are known as (i) field-effect display and (ii) dynamic scat-
tering display. When field-effect display is energized, the energized areas of the LCD absorb the
incident light and, hence give localized black display. When dynamic scattering display is energized,
the molecules of energized area of the display become turbulent and scatter light in all directions.
Consequently, the activated areas take on a frosted glass appearance resulting in a silver display. Of
course, the un-energized areas remain translucent.
      As shown in Fig. 53.7 (b), a digit on an LCD has a segment appearance. For example, if number
5 is required, the terminals 8, 2, 3, 6 and 5 would be energized so that only these regions would be
activated while the other areas would remain clear.
      (d) Advantages
      An LCD has the distinct advantage of extremely low power requirement (about 10-15 µW per
7-segment display as compared to a few mW for a LED). It is due to the fact that it does not itself
generate any illumination but depends on external illumination for its visual effect (colour depending
on the incident light). They have a life-time of about 50,000 hours.
      (e) Uses
      1. Field-effect LCDs are normally used in watches and portable instruments where source of
          energy is a prime consideration.
      2. Thousands of tiny LCDs are used to form the picture elements (pixels) of the screen in one
          type of B & W pocket TV receiver.
      3. Recent desk top LCD monitors.
      4. Note book computer display
      5. Cellular phone display, to display data on personal digital assistant (PDAs) such as Palm Vx
          etc.
                                                                   Optoelectronic Devices         2093
     The liquid crystal display (LCDs) commonly used on notebook computers and handheld PDAs
are also appearing on desktop. These flat panel displays promise great clarity at increasingly high
resolutions and are available in screen sizes upto 15 inches. The LCD monitor offers benefits and
drawbacks. The first benefit is size. Because of the need to house the tube itself, cathode-ray tube
(CRT) monitors are big and heavy. LCD monitors are only a few inches deep and they are much
lighter in weight. However LCD monitors are expensive than CRTs at present. Another problem is
the viewing angle. The optimal viewing angle of an LCD is from straight in front and as you move
further to the side the screen becomes harder to read, much more so than with a CRT. Moreover
screen resolutions generally reach only as high as 1,024 × 768, which is insufficient for some appli-
cations. Fig. 53.7(c) shows the picture of an LCD used in portable instrument.

53.5. P-N Junction Photodiode
     It is a two-terminal junction
device which is operated by first
reverse-biasing the junction and then
illuminating it. A reverse-biased P-N
junction has a small amount of reverse
saturation current Is (or I0 ) due to
thermally-generated electron-hole
pairs. In silicon, Is is the range of
nanoamperes. The number of these
minority carriers depends on the
                                                                    Fig. 53.8
intensity of light incident on the
junction. When the diode is in glass package, light can reach the junction and thus change the reverse
current.
                                                 The basic biasing arrangement, construction and sym-
                                                 bols of a photodiode are shown in Fig. 53.8. As seen,
                                                 a lens has been used in the cap of the unit to focus
                                                 maximum light on the reverse-biased junction. The
                                                 active diameter of these devices is about 2.5 mm but
                                                 they are mounted in standard TO-5 packages with a
                                                 window to allow maximum incident light.
                                                    The characteristics of Fig. 53.9 show that for a
                                                 given reverse voltage, Iλ (or Is) increases with increase
                                                 in the level of illumination. The dark current refers

                   Photodiode                                          Reverse Voltage 
                                                                   – 3V     – 2V       – 1V
to the current that flows when no light is incident.
By changing the illumination level, reverse cur-
rent can be changed. In this way, reverse resis-          Dark                                100 µA
                                                         Current          10,000
tance of the diode can be changed by a factor of
nearly 20.                                                                 15,000             200 µA
     A photodiode can turn its current ON and OFF                                     2                I
in nanoseconds. Hence, it is one of the fastest pho-                      20,000 Im/m         300 µA
todetectors. It is used where it is required to switch
light ON and OFF at a maximum rate. Applica-                                  Fig. 53.9
tions of a photodiode include
2094        Electrical Technology

    1.   detection, both visible and invisible ;
    2.   demodulation ;
    3.   switching ;
    4.   logic circuit that require stability and high speed ;
    5.   character recognition ;
    6.   optical communication equipment ;
    7.   encoders etc.

53.6. Dust Sensor
     Fig. 53.10 shows a combination of an LED and a
photodiode used as a dust sensor. As seen, the light
emitted from the LED gets reflected by the dust par-
ticles. The reflected light is collected by the photo-
diode and is converted into an electrical signal. The
dust sensor is employed in cleaners.
     The combination of an LED and a photodiode is
also used as : (1) a paper sensor in facsimile ma-                            Fig. 53.10
chines, (2) as a tape-end sensor in videotape record-
ers/players, and (3) as a dirt detector for rinsing in washing
machines.

53.7. Photoconductive Cell
     It is a semiconductor device whose resistance varies in-
versely with the intensity of light that falls upon it. It is also
known as photoresistive cell or photoresistor because it oper-
ates on the principle of photoresistivity.
     (a) Theory                                                            CdS photo sensitive detectors
     The resistivity (and, hence, resistance) of a semiconductor depends on the number of free charge
                                                                 carriers available in it. When the semi-
                   Lens                                          conductor is not illuminated, the number
                                                                 of charge carriers is small and, hence, re-
                                                                 sistivity is high. But when light in the
                                                                 form of photons strikes the semiconduc-
                                                                 tor, each photon delivers energy to it. If
                                                                 the photon energy is greater than the en-
                        Photosensitive                           ergy band gap of the semiconductor, free
                        Semiconductor                            mobile charge carriers are liberated and,
                                                                 as a result, resistivity of the semiconduc-
                                                                 tor is decreased.
                                                                      (b) Construction and Working
                                                                      Photoconductive cells are generally
                                                                 made of cadmium compounds such as
                                                                 cadmium sulphide (CdS) and cadmium
                                                                 selenide (CdSe). Spectral response of
           (a)                                 (b)               CdS cell is similar to the human eye,
                           Fig. 53.11                            hence such cells are often used to simu-
                                                                 late the human eye. That is why they find
                                                                             Optoelectronic Devices         2095
use in light metering circuits in photographic cam-
eras.
      The construction of a typical photo conductive         100
cell and its two alternative circuit symbols are shown
in Fig. 53.11 (a) and (b) respectively. As seen, a




                                                          Resistance (k )
                                                              10
thin layer of photosensitive semiconductor material




                                                                Cell
is deposited in the form of a long strip zig-zagged
across a disc-shaped ceramic base with protective               1
sides. For added protection, a glass lens or plastic
cover is used. The two ends of the strip are brought
out to connecting pins below the base.                        0.1
      The terminal characteristic of a photoconduc-                       10        100        1000
tive cell is shown in Fig. 53.12. It depicts how the                        Illumination (lux)
resistance of the cell varies with light intensity. Typi-                   Fig. 53.12
cally, the dark resistance of the cell is 1 MΩ or larger. Under illumination, the cell resistance drops to
a value between 1 and 100 kΩ depending on surface illumination.
      (c) Applications
      A photoconductive cell is an inexpensive and simple detector which is widely used in OFF/ON
circuits, light-measurement and light-detecting circuits.
      Example 53.1. A relay is controlled by a photo-
conductive cell which has resistance of 100 kΩ when
illuminated and 1 kΩ when in the dark. The relay is
supplied with 10 mA from a 30-V supply when cell is
illuminated and is required to be de-energized when
the cell is in the dark. Sketch a suitable circuit and
calculate the required series resistance and value of
dark current.
       (Optoelectronic Devices, Gujarat Univ. 1993)
      Solution. The circuit is as shown in Fig. 30.13
where R is a current-limiting resistor.
             I = 30/(R + r)
—where r is cell resistance
                                                                              Fig. 53.13
      ∴ R = (30/I) − r
When illuminated
                               −3
            R = (30/10 × 10 ) − 1 × 10 =2 × 10 = 2 kΩ
                                            3          3

      Dark current is given by
                                                       −3
                 Id =30/(2 + 100) × 10 = 0.3 × 10 A = 0.3 mA
                                          3


53.8. Phototransistor
     It is light-sensitive transistor and is similar to an ordinary bipolar
junction transistor (BJT) except that it has no connection to the base
terminal. Its operation is based on the photodiode that exists at the
CB junction. Instead of the base current, the input to the transistor is
provided in the form of light as shown in the schematic symbol of
Fig. 53.14 (a).
     Silicon NPNs are mostly used as photo transistors. The device
is usually packed in a TO-type can with a lens on top although it is                      Phototransistor
2096        Electrical Technology

sometimes encapsulated in clear plastic. When                             12
there is no incident light on the CB junction,
there is a small thermally-generated collector-
to-emitter leakage current ICEO which, in this                             8
case, is called dark current and is in the nA range.                 IC (mA)
     When light is incident on the CB junction,
a base current Iλ is produced which is directly                            4
proportional to the light intensity. Hence, col-                                        Dark Current
lector current IC = β Iλ
     Typical collector characteristic curves of a                            0      10     20        30
phototransistor are shown in Fig. 53.14 (b).                                           VCE (V)
Each individual curve corresponds to a certain             (a)                             (b)
                                                  2
value of light intensity expressed in mW/cm .                            Fig. 53.14
As seen, IC increases with light intensity.
     The phototransistor has applications similar to those of a photodiode. Their main differences are
in the current and response time. The photo-transistor has the advantages of greater sensitivity and
current capacity than photodiodes. However, photodiodes are faster of the two, switching in less than
a nanosecond.
                                                                                                             E
53.9. Photodarlington
     As shown in Fig. 53.15 a photodarlington consists of a
phototransistor in a Darlington arrangement with a common
transistor. It has a much greater sensitivity to incident radi-
ant energy than a phototransistor because of higher current
gain. However, its switching time of 50 µs is much longer
than the phototransistor (2 µs) or the photodiode (1 ns). Its
circuit symbol is shown in Fig. 53.15.
Applications                                                                                               C
     Photodarlingtons are used in a variety of applications                          Fig. 53.15
some of which are given below.
     A light-operated relay is shown in Fig. 53.16 (a). The phototransistor T 1 drives the bipolar tran-
sistor T 2. When sufficient light falls on T 2, it is driven into saturation so that IC is increased manifold.
This collector current while passing through the relay coil energizes the relay.
                                            + VCC                                                 + VCC



                             C     Relay                                       C
                                                                                          Relay
                                                                                          Coil




                                   Coil
                                                                      R                            Relay
                                            Relay
                   T1                                                                             Contacts
                                           Contacts
                             RB
                                             T2                                                     T2




                                                                     T1

                             (a)                                                    (b)
                                                    Fig. 53.16
                                                                   Optoelectronic Devices                2097
     Fig. 53.16 (b) shows a dark-operated relay circuit i.e. one in which relay is deenergized when
light falls on the phototransistor. Here, T 1 and R form a potential divider across V CC. With insuffi-
cient light incident on T 1, transistor T 2 is biased ON thereby keeping the relay energized. However,
when there is sufficient light, T 1 turns ON and pulls the base of T 2 low thereby turning T 2 OFF and
hence, deenergizing the relay.
     Such relays are used in many applications such as (i) automatic door activators, (ii) process
counters and (iii) various alarm systems for smoke or intrusion detection.
53.10. Photo voltaic or Solar Cell
      Such cells operate on the principle of photovoltaic action i.e. conversion of light energy into
electrical energy. This action occurs in all semiconductors which are constructed to absorb energy.
      (a) Construction
      As shown in Fig. 53.17 (a), a basic solar cell consists of P-type and N-type semiconductor mate-
rial (usually, silicon or selenium) forming a P-N junction. The bottom surface of the cell (which is
always away from light) covered with a continuous conductive contact to which a wire lead is at-
tached. The upper surface has a maximum area exposed to light with a small contact either along the
edge or around the perimeter. The surface layer of P-type material is extremely thin (0.5 mm) so that
light can penetrate to the junction.
                    Light                    Transparent        Light
 Metal                          Glass        Conducting
 Ring                              +         Film
 Contact
                                    P-Type
     P-N                                      N-Type
                   N-Type           Si                          P-Type            P-N
     Junction                                  CdO2
                     Si                                           Si              Junction

                                                                                  +
                     (a)                                          (b)                              (c)
                                                  Fig. 53.17
     Although silicon is commonly used for fabricating solar cells, another construction consists of P-
type selenium covered with a layer of N-type cadmium oxide to form P-N junction as shown in Fig.
53.17 (b). Two alternative circuit symbols are shown in Fig. 53.17 (c). Power solar cells are also
fabricated in flat strips to form efficient coverage of available surface area. Incidentally, the maxi-
mum efficiency of a solar cell in converting sunlight into electrical energy is nearly 15 per cent at the
present.
     (b) Theory
     When the P-N junction of a
solar cell is illuminated, electron-                            Light energy
hole pairs are generated in much
the same way, as in photovoltaic
cell. An electric field is estab-          Anti-reflection
                                              coating                                 Electrode
lished near the P-N junction by                                                                   External load
the positive and negative ions cre-      N-type silicon
ated due to the production of
                                          P-type silicon
electron-hole pairs which leads to
the development of potential                                                                      Current
                                                                                       Electrode
across the junction. Since the
number of electron-hole pairs far
exceeds the number needed for            A photovoltaic cell generates electricity when irradiated by sunlight
thermal equilibrium, many of the
2098        Electrical Technology

electrons are pulled across the junction by the force of the electric field. Those that cross the junction
contribute to the current in the cell and through the external load. The terminal voltage of the cell is
directly proportional to the intensity of the incident light. The voltage may be as high as 0.6 V
depending on the external load. Usually a large number of cells are arranged in an array in order to
obtained higher voltages and currents as shown in Fig. 53.18.

                                                                                             D




                                                                                                  Ni-Cd
                                                   RL                                                       RL




                                                               10 Cells


                                                                          10 Cells
                                                                                                  Battery




                     Fig. 53.18                                                      Fig. 53.19
     Solar cells act like a battery when connected in series or parallel. Fig. 53.19 show two groups
of 10 series cells connected in parallel with each other. If each cell provides 0.5 V at 150 mA, the
overall value of the solar bank is 5 V at 150 mA. The two parallel solar banks provide 5 V at 300
mA. This solar power source supplies the load and also charges the Ni-Cd battery. The battery provides
power in the absence of light. A blocking diode D is used to isolate the solar cells from the Ni-Cd battery
otherwise in the absence of light, the battery will discharge through the cells thereby damaging them.
     A solar cell operates with fair efficiency, has unlimited life, can be easily mass-produced and has
a high power capacity per weight. It is because of these qualities that it has become an important
source of power for earth satellites.
     Example 53.2. An earth satellite has on board 12-V battery which supplies a continuous cur-
rent of 0.5 A. Solar cells are used to keep the battery charged. The solar cells are illuminated by the
sun for 12 hours in every 24 hours. If during exposure, each cell gives 0.5 V at 50 mA, determine the
number of cells required.                              (Optoelectronics Devices, Gujarat Univ. 1994)
     Solution. The solar cell battery-charging circuit is shown in Fig. 53.20. The cells must be
connected in series to provide the necessary voltage and such groups must be connected in parallel to
provide the necessary current. The
                                                                                R      D
charging voltage has to be greater
than the battery voltage of 12 V. Al-
lowing for different drops, let the so-
lar bank voltage be 13.5 V.
     Number of series connected so-
lar cells = 13.5/0.5 = 27
     The charge given out by batter-
ies during a 24 hour period = 12 ×                                 13.5 V
                                                                                         B
                                                                                                      12 V
0.5 = 6 Ah. Hence, solar cells must
supply this much charge over the
same period. However, solar cells
deliver current only when they illu-
minated i.e. for 12 hours in every 24
hours. Necessary charging current                                      Fig. 53.20
                                                                   Optoelectronic Devices          2099
required from the solar cells = 6 Ah/12 h = 0.5 A.
    Total number of groups of solar cells required to be connected in parallel is
         = output current / cell current = 0.5 / 50 × 10 = 10
                                                        3

    ∴ total number of solar cells required for the earth satellite = 27 × 10 = 270

53.11. Laser Diode
     Like LEDs, laser diodes are typical PN junction devices used under a forward-bias. The word
LASER is an acronym for Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. The use of
laser is (becoming increasing common) in medical equipment used in surgery and in consumer prod-
ucts like compact disk (CD) players, laser printers, hologram scanners etc.
     (a) Construction
     Broadly speaking, the laser diode structure can be divided into two categories :
     1. Surface-emitting laser diodes : These laser diodes emit light in a direction perpendicular
          to the PN junction plane.
     2. Edge-emitting laser diodes : These laser diodes emit light in a direction parallel to the PN
          junction plane.
     Fig. 53.21 (a) shows the structure of an edge-emitting laser diode. This type of structure is called
Fabry-Perot type laser. As seen from the figure, a P-N junction is formed by two layers of doped
gallium arsenide (GaAs). The length of the PN junction bears a precise relationship with the wave-
length of the light to be emitted. As seen, there is a highly reflective surface at one end of the junction
and a partially reflective surface at the other end. External leads provide the anode and cathode
connections.
                             +                         Full               +          Partial
                                                       Reflector                     Reflector
        Highly                          } Depletion
                                          Region
        Reflective
                         P
        End
        P-N              N             Partially                                      Laser
        Junction                       Reflective                                     Beam
                                       End

                             (a)                                        (b)
                                                Fig. 53.21
     (b) Theory
     When the P-N junction is forward-biased by an external voltage source,
electrons move across the junction and usual recombination occurs in the
depletion region which results in the production of photons. As forward
current is increased, more photons are produced which drift at random in
the depletion region. Some of these photons strike the reflective surface
perpendicularly. These reflected photons enter the depletion region, strike
other atoms and release more photons. All these photons move back and              Laser diode
forth between the two reflective surfaces. [Fig. 53.21 (b)] The photon
activity becomes so intense that at some point, a strong beam of laser light comes out of the partially
reflective surface of the diode.
     (c) Unique Characteristics of Laser Light
     The beam of laser light produced by the diode has the following unique characteristics :
     1. It is coherent i.e. there is no path difference between the waves comprising the beam;
     2. It is monochromatic i.e. it consists of one wavelength and hence one colour only;
2100       Electrical Technology

     3. It is collimated i.e. emitted light waves travel parallel to each
other.
     Laser diodes have a threshold level of current above which the laser
action occurs but below which the laser diode behaves like a LED emit-
ting incoherent light. The schematic symbol of a laser diode is similar to
that of LED. Incidentally, a filter or lens is necessary to view the laser
beam.
     (d) Applications
     Laser diodes are used in variety of applications ranging from medi-
cal equipment used in surgery to consumer products like optical disk equip-
ment, laser printers, hologram scanners etc. Laser diodes emitting vis-            Fig. 53.22
ible light are used as pointers. Those emitting visible and infrared light
are used to measure range (or distance). The laser diodes are also widely used in parallel processing
of information and in parallel interconnections between computers. Some of these applications are
discussed in the following articles.

53.12. Optical Disks
     The major application field for laser diodes is in optical disk equipment. This equipment is used
for reading or recording information and can be broadly divided into two groups :
     1. Reading-only and                        2. Recording-and-reading type.
     The optical disk equipment of either type make use of a laser diode, lenses and photodiodes.
During recording, it changes electrical information into optical information and then records the
information on the optical disk. During reading (or playback), the head optically reads the recorded
information and changes the optical information into electrical information. Fig. 53.22 shows the
different types of optical disks used in practice. The commercial systems make use of disks that are
90, 120, 130 and 300 mm in diameter. A mini disk, 64 mm in diameter is also used for digital audio.




                                              Fig. 53.23
     The optical disks have several advantages over semiconductor memories. Some of these include
their larger data storage capacity, shorter access time and smaller size. Therefore they are used in
terminal equipment of computers as well as in audio visual equipment.

53.13. Read-only Optical Disks Equipment
     Fig. 53.24 shows an optical equipment for reading data from digital audio (compact) disks.
Compact disks (CDs) which are 120 mm in diameter are typical digital audio disks. Compact disks
usually means digital audio compact disk, but it also includes the read-only memory (CD-ROM) for
data memory and interactive compact disk (CD-I) for multimedia use.
                                                                 Optoelectronic Devices             2101
     Audio information (i.e. sound) is digitally recorded in stereo on the
surface of a CD in the form of microscopic “pits” and “flats”. As seen
from Fig. 53.24, the light emitted from the laser diode passes through the
lens and is focussed to a diameter of about 1 µm on the surface of a disk.
As the CD rotates, the lens and beam follow the track under control of a
servo motor. The laser light which is altered by the pits and flats along the
recorded track is reflected back from the track through the lens and optical
system to infrared photodiodes. The signal from the photodiodes is then
used to reproduce the digitally recorded sound.                                          A CD-Rom




                                                   Fig. 53.24
53.14. Printers Using Laser Diodes
     There are two types of optical sources usually used in printers ; (1) laser diodes and (2) LED
arrays. The printers using laser diodes are called laser beam printers (or simply laser printers). These are
one of the most attractive type of equipment in office automation in today’s world. Words and figures can
be printed rapidly and clearly more easily by a laser printer than by other types of printers.
     (Courtesy optical semiconductor devices by M.Fukuda published by John Weliy & Sons Inc.)
2102        Electrical Technology

      Fig. 53.25 shows a simplified diagram of a laser printer. As seen the laser diode is driven by
modulated signals from the computer. The optical beam after passing through the lens is reflected by
the rotating polygon mirror and scanned on the photosensitive drum. The drum is homogeneously
charged when it passes through the charging unit consisting of an LED array. The homogeneous
electrification is partially erased in accordance with the scanned optical beam. This is because of the
fact that the electrical resistance at the light-irradiated part decreases and the electric charge is re-
leased. This causes the signals (i.e. data) from the computer to be written on to the drum. At the
developing unit, an electrically charged powder (called toner) is electrostatically attached to the writ-
ten parts. At the transcribing unit, the powder is transferred to the paper. Next, the transferred pattern
is fixed by heating and pressing at the fixing unit. The data from the computer is thus printed on the
paper.




                                                Fig. 53.25
53.15. Hologram Scanners
     The hologram scanner is widely used in various equipment and is ordinarily used in bar-code
readers in point-of-sale systems (such as super marked checkout counters). It is also used in laser
printers for scanning the laser beam on the drum precisely.
                                                                         Optoelectronic Devices                     2103
     Fig. 53.26 shows a simplified schematic of a hologram scanner. As seen, the optical beam for
reading the bar-code is focussed by a lens through the hologram disk and scanned on the bar-code by
rotating the hologram disk. Gratings with coaxial circles are formed on the hologram disk. This

                                                        Lens
                                                                   Mir
                                        Laser diode                   ror            Light beam                  Bar code
                                                                                     for reading
                                                                                                    Scanning




                                                                            Reflected                             Hologram
                                                                            signal       Hologram disk              disk
                                                      Lens

                                                                                                   Rotating


           Hologram scanners
                                                               Photodiode

                                                                                Fig. 53.26

causes the incident laser beam to bend at the grating by an amount determined by the grating pitch.
The reflected light modulated according to the bar-code is reflected by the mirror and monitored by
the photodiode. The monitored optical signal is then translated into an electrical signal.

53.16. Laser Range Finder
     The laser diodes along with photodiodes can be used to measure the range (i.e. a distance) of an
object. Fig. 53.27 shows a simple schematic of a laser range finder. As seen, the laser diode is
modulated with high current pulses. The pulsed high-power beam is emitted in the direction of an
object. The beam is reflected from the object. The reflected beam is detected with a photo detector
(or photodiode). The range is calculated as the difference between the time the light was emitted
from the laser diode and the time it was detected by the photodiode.



                                                                     D

                Pulsed modulation
                                                                                                        Object


                      Time      Laser diode      Lens



                                                                   Reflected light
                    Time
                                    Photodiode   Lens


                                                      Fig. 53.27
2104       Electrical Technology

    Let                D = distance between the laser range finder and the object.
                      ∆T = Time difference between the instance when the light was emitted from
                             the laser diode and the instance when it was detected by the photo-
                             diode
                              1
    Then               D =      × speed of light × ∆T
                              2
    A 2-dimensional array of laser diodes and photodetectors can be constructed. Such a system is
used to obtain 3-D images of an object.

53.17. Light-activated SCR (LASCR)
     The operation of a LASCR is essentially similar to that of a conventional SCR except that it is
light-triggered (Fig.53.28). Moreover, it has
a window and lens which focuses light on                                  Alarm
                                                                           Door
the gate junction area. The LASCR operates                               Opener
like a latch. It can be triggered ON by a light        S
input on the gate area but does not turn OFF
when light source is removed. It can be
turned OFF only by reducing the current
through it below its holding current. Depend-
ing on its size, a LASCR is capable of han-
dling larger amount of current that can be                                  RG
handled by a photodiode or a photo-transis-
tor.
                                                                        Fig. 53.28
     Fig. 53.28 shows how a LASCR can be
used for energizing a latching relay. The input dc source turns on the electric lamp and the resulting
incident light triggers the LASCR into conduction. The anode current energizes the relay and closes
the contact. It is seen that the input dc source is electrically isolated from the rest of the circuit.

53.18. Optical Isolators
     Optical isolators are designed to electrically isolate one circuit from another while allowing one
circuit to control the other. The usual purpose of isolation is to provide protection from high-voltage
transients, surge voltages and low-level electrical noise that could possibly result in an erroneous
output or damage to the device. Such isolators allow interfacing of circuits with different voltage
levels and different grounds etc.


                                            LED                            LED
                 LED




                  (a)                             (b)                            (c)

                                              Fig. 53.29
                                                               Optoelectronic Devices            2105
     An optical isolator (or coupler) consists of a light source such as LED and a photodetector such
as a photo transistor as shown in Fig. 53. 29 (a) and is available in a standard IC package.
     When LED is forward-biased, the light produced by it is transferred to the phototransistor which
is turned ON thereby producing current through the external load.
     Fig. 53.29 (b) shows a Darlington transistor coupler which is used when increased output current
capability is needed beyond that provided by the phototransistor output. The LASCR output coupler
of Fig. 53.29 (c) can be used in applications where a low-level input voltage is required to latch a high
voltage relay for activating some kind of electro-mechanical device.

53.19. Optical Modulators
      Light emitting PN junction devices
such as LEDs and laser diodes are easily
modulated by superimposing signals on to
the injected current. This is direct modu-
lation. Laser diodes in high-bit rate and
long-span optical communication systems
are frequently used under direct modula-
tion.
      However direct modulation results in
chirping which limits transmission quality
because of dispersion in optical fibres. An
optical modulator can modulate the light
output from laser diodes with little or no
chirping. There are two types of optical                            Optical modulator
modulators :
      1. The semiconductor optical modulators
      2. Optical modulators composed of dielectric materials such as lithium nitrate (LiNO3)
      The semiconductor optical modulators are PN junction diodes and can further be subdivided into
two types :
      1. Devices used under forward bias (as LEDs and laser diodes are used). The optical modula-
tion in these devices is carried out by changing gain or loss within the modulators.
     2. Devices used under reverse bias (i.e., as photodiodes are used). Most high-performance
semiconductor optical modulators are used under
reverse bias. The reverse bias is needed to generate
strong electric field. Optical modulation is basically
performed by modulating the refractive index or                                       Modulated
optical absorption coefficient of the modulators. The                                 light
devices which make use of refractive index
phenomenon for modulation are called phase
modulation type devices while those that use optical
absorption coefficient phenomenon are called
intensity modulation type devices.
                                                                       P                    Electrodes
     There are several different types of optical modu-
lators available today. But the waveguide type opti-                   N
cal modulator is more common in use. Further there            Input
are several different waveguide type optical modula-          Light
tor structures possible. Fig. 53.30 shows a mesa type
optical modulator structure.                                               Fig. 53.30
2106        Electrical Technology

     It may be noted that although we have shown the structure making use of a simple N- and P-layer
but in reality each layer (N-type or P-type) is made up of several different semiconductors.

53.20. Optical Fibre Communication Systems
     The optical fibre communication systems (such as public communication networks and data
links) are the basic infrastructure of the information hungry society. There are several advantages of
the optical fibre system over metallic transmission systems as listed below :
     1. Data can be transmitted at a very high-frequency over longer distances without much loss.
     2. Electromagnetic induction (EMI) noise is never induced during transmission through opti-
          cal fibre cables.
     3. Optical fibre cable is light, flexible and economical.
     Fig. 53.31 shows the public optical fibre communication system broadly divided into two groups:
(1) Submarine systems, and (2) Land systems. Submarine systems have already been used to connect
countries all over the world. The submarine systems help people to talk overseas without any time
delay.




                                               Fig. 53.31
     In land systems, long-haul systems have been connected between large cities. The land systems
also include systems such as subscriber systems and CATV (i.e. community or common antenna
television, cable and telecommunication television system, or cable television system).

     Electrical signal                   Optical signal                     Electrical signal




                                       Optical fibre cable
                           LED,
                         Laser diode                          Photodiode
                         Transmitter    Optical connector
                                                               Receiver


                                               Fig. 53.32
     Fig. 53.32 shows an application of LEDs, laser diodes and photodiodes in a simplified optical
fibre communication systems. The LEDs and laser diodes emit light modulated with a signal. The
optical signal is then transmitted through the optical fibre and is received with photodiodes on the
destination side. In this type of a system LEDs or laser diodes emit the light directly through the
optical fibre and therefore is referred to as direct modulation type systems. But in more recent
                                                                Optoelectronic Devices                   2107
systems, the optical modulators modulate the light emitted from the laser diodes and then the modu-
lated light is transmitted through the optical fibre [refer to Fig. 53.33].




                                                  Fig. 53.33
     In long-haul systems, repeaters (which include photodiodes and laser diodes and electronic
circuits) are inserted. In the repeater, the weak optical signal being transmitted through the optical
fibre is detected by the photodiode. The detected signal is reformed and amplified by the electronic
circuits. The amplified signal is converted again into an optical signal by a laser diode and transmit-
ted again through the optical fibre cable. Fig. 53.34 shows a simple schematic of a repeater.

                                 Optical signal                 Optical signal




           Optical fibre cable                     Repeater                        Optical fibre cable
                                                               Optical connector
                            Optical connector


                                                  Fig. 53.34
     From the modulation point of view, the optical fibre communication systems can be divided into
digital systems and analog systems. Most long-haul and large capacity optical fibre communication
systems are digital systems. The analog systems are used for transmitting information over a short
distance.

53.21. Optical Fibre Data Links
     The use of optical fibre data links has wide spread in the past few decades. Its application ranges
from local area networks (LANs) to the computer, digital audio and mobile fields. Several different
types of LEDs and laser diodes emitting light at wavelengths ranging from visible to the infrared are
used as optical sources. The transmission data rate is a function of transmission distance and varies
from application to application. For computer links where the distance varies from 1 m to 100 m, the
data transmission rate varies from 1 M bits/s to 100 M bits/s. For local-area-networks used in factory,
office and building automation, the data transmission rate varies from 10 K bits/s to 5 M bits/s. In
digital audio field, where the distance is below 1 m the data transmission rate varies from 500 bits/s
to over 10 M bits/s. Similarly in mobile fields (such as ship, aircraft, train and automotive applica-
tions) where the distance could vary from 1 m to 100 m, the data transmission rate varies from 1 K
bits/s to 1 M bits/s.
2108        Electrical Technology

     1. Optical fibre local
area networks. The optical fi-
bre local area networks (LANs)
are similar to the public commu-
nication systems. Some of their
advantages over the systems us-
ing metallic cables are : (1) high
transmission capacity and bit
rate and (2) longer transmission
distance. However, the range of
LANs is restricted. They are
more commonly used within fac-                                       Fig. 53.35
tories, offices, buildings etc.
Computers, printers, facsimile
machines and other office
equipment are connected with
each other by optical fibre
cables as shown in Fig. 53.35.
     The LEDs and laser diodes
are used to transmit data
through the optical fibre cable
and photodiodes are used to re-
ceive data. The different types
of equipment connected in the
                                                               Fig. 53.36
LAN could be one of the fol-
lowing two types : (1) An optical ethernet having a radial-shape network as shown in Fig. 53.36 (a)
or (2) a fibre-distributed data interface (FDDI) having a ring-shape network as shown in Fig. 53.36
(b).
     2. Digital audio field. Fig. 53.37 shows an example of a data link in digital audio field. As
seen, the optical fibre cable is used to connect compact disk (CD) player, laser disk (LD) player,
digital audio tape (DAT) and tuner with the amplifier and speaker. The connection between the
amplifier and everything except DAT is unidirectional. The audio digital signals from CD, LD player,
DAT and tuner are converted into optical sig-
nals by LEDs or laser diodes at one end of
the fibre optic cable and then transmitted
through the cable to the opposite end. At the
opposite end, the signals are received by pho-
todiodes and converted into an electrical sig-
nal for amplification and finally speaker for
reproduction to a sound.
     3. Mobile fields. The optical data
links are very suitable in mobile fields such
as ship, aircraft, train, automotive etc. The                            Fig. 53.37
reason is that optical data links are very
compact, and light in weight than metallic data links. In addition to this, the optical data links are not
subjected to noise induced by electromagnetic induction.
                                                                  Optoelectronic Devices                2109

                                      OBJECTIVE TESTS – 53

1. LEDs are commonly fabricated from gallium                  (e) both (b) and (c).
   compounds like gallium arsenide and gallium             8. A photodarlington comprises of
   phosphide because they                                     (a) a phototransistor
   (a) are cheap                                              (b) a transistor
   (b) are easily available                                   (c) a photodiode
   (c) emit more heat                                         (d) both (a) and (b).
   (d) emit more light.                                    9. A solar cell operates on the principle of
2. A LED is basically a ................... P-N junc-
                                                              (a) diffusion
   tion.
                                                              (b) recombination
   (a) forward-biased
                                                              (c) photo voltaic action
   (b) reverse-biased
                                                              (d) carrier flow.
   (c) lightly-doped
                                                          10. Solar cells are used as source of power in earth
   (d) heavily-doped.
                                                              satellites because they have
3. As compared to a LED display, the distinct ad-
                                                              (a) very high efficiency
   vantage of an LCD display is that it requires
                                                              (b) unlimited life
   (a) no illumination
                                                              (c) higher power capacity per weight
   (b) extremely low power
   (c) no forward-bias                                        (d) both (b) and (c)
   (d) a solid crystal                                        (e) both (a) and (b).
4. Before illuminating a P-N junction photodiode,         11. The device possessing the highest sensitivity
   it has to be                                               is a
   (a) reverse-biased                                         (a) photo conductive cell
   (b) forward-biased                                         (b) photovoltaic cell
   (c) switched ON                                            (c) photodiode
   (d) switched OFF.                                          (d) phototransistor
5. In a photoconductive cell, the resistance of the       12. The unique characteristics of LASER light are
   semiconductor material varies ............. with the       that it is
   intensity of incident light.                               (a) coherent
   (a) directly                                               (b) monochromatic
   (b) inversely                                              (c) collimated
   (c) exponentially                                          (d) all of the above
   (d) logarithmically.                                   13. The LASCR operates like a
6. A photoconductive cell is known as .................       (a) latch                 (b) LED
   cell.                                                      (c) photodiode            (d) phototransistor.
   (a) phototransistor                                    14. Optical couplers are designed to ............. one
   (b) photoresistor                                          circuit from another.
   (c) photovoltaic                                           (a) control               (b) isolate
   (d) both (a) and (b).                                      (c) disconnect            (d) protect.
7. A phototransistor excels a photodiode in the           15. The main purpose of using optical isolators is
   matter of                                                  to provide protection to devices from
   (a) faster switching                                       (a) high-voltage transients
   (b) greater sensitivity                                    (b) surge voltages
   (c) higher current capacity                                (c) low-level noise
   (d) both (a) and (b)                                       (d) all of the above.
2110        Electrical Technology

 16. A LED emits visible light when its ..............   18. GaAs, LEDs emit radiation in the
     (a) P-N junction is reverse-biased                      (a) ultraviolet region
     (b) depletion region widens                             (b) violet-blue green range of the visible re-
     (c) holes and electrons recombine                            gion
     (d) P-N junction becomes hot.                           (c) visible region
 17. In LED, light is emitted because                        (d) infra-red region
      (a) recombination of charge carriers takes         19. Phototransistors respond much like a conven-
          place                                              tional transistor except that, in their case, light
                                                             energy is used to .........
      (b) diode gets heated up
                                                             (a) alter leakage current
      (c) light falling on the diode gets amplified
                                                             (b) change base voltage
      (d) light gets reflected due to lens action.           (c) switch it ON
                                                             (d) alter emitter current.

                                                 ANSWERS
    1. (d)   2. (a) 3. b     4. (a) 5. (b) 6. (d) 7. (e) 8. (d)            9. (c)   10. (d) 11. (d) 12. (d)
    13. (a) 14. (b) 15. (d) 16. (c) 17. (a) 18. (d) 19. (c)




                                                                                                     GO To FIRST
